This week on the podcast, another
banger. Uh Steve Cohen is Black Rockck's
chief product officer and head of
product solutions. Black Rockck runs
$3.5 trillion. They're the world's
largest asset manager. Their Eyesshares
ETF division is over $5 trillion. Uh
there are few people in the world better
situated to identify what is happening
in the world of asset and wealth
management than Steve Cohen. not just
fixed income active index uh Bitcoin
digital assets, they're also moving into
privates and alternatives. Whether
that's an ETF or just part of that
platform is something else entirely. I I
thought this conversation was
fascinating and I think you will also
with no further ado, Black Rockck's
chief product officer and head of
product solutions, Steven Cohen.
Steve Cohen, welcome to Bloomberg.
>> It's great to be here.
>> We're going to talk a lot about what you
do at BlackRock and how the company has
been growing, but I want to start with
your background.
>> Uh degree in economics from Southampton
College. Was the plan always to go into
investment strategy or what were you
thinking back then?
>> I'm not sure I had a plan. I uh I
studied economics at school and then at
university and I I was always I was
always very interested in this kind of
concept of the markets. I didn't have
any background no family background in
in markets or investing but I always
found reading up about markets
interesting. Um and and what kind of got
me in it was a slight fluke. We were
talking about flukes before the show.
Um, one of my neighbors was a telecoms
engineer and he used to go around to all
the banks installing the dealer boards.
>> Mhm.
>> And he one day and I was talking to him
and one day
>> like various ATMs, automatic tele
machines we call them here.
>> Yeah. Dealer the the phone phone systems
that you use on the trading floors, you
know, the all the with all the hoot and
holler and all that kind of stuff.
>> Diebolds and I was missing.
>> Oh, right.
>> Which maybe he installed those as well.
I don't know.
>> Those were the big ATM manufacturers way
back. and uh and he said so I got
talking about it and I'd mentioned this
interest and he said well why don't you
do a day's work experience with me we'll
go to a bank so we went to one of the
banks I can't remember which one it was
and I walked onto this trading floor and
you know
>> for someone who had no experience or
never experienced this before uh it was
amazing there was people shouting there
was screens and flashing numbers and
stuff like that and I thought you know
what this this looks pretty cool this
buzz was uh was uh so the kind of
combination of an opport opportunity to
work in something that that took
economics and markets and the world and
then this kind of feeling of a buzzy
environment. That was the thing. And so
I applied to a number of banks and at a
university got an opportunity to go to
UBS.
>> So that was your first gig right out of
school. You working with Convertibles
and Fixed Income and something similar
at ING Bearings. Yeah.
>> Um tell us about your your work uh at
UBS and ING. What what sort of job was
it? So I worked uh I originally started
in fixed income and uh and then and then
went into convertible bonds and a lot of
what I spent my time doing was kind of
more market strategist type of role. So
talking to clients about what was going
on in the markets, what was going on in
the bond markets, trade, you know,
developing trade ideas for clients and
uh and then that's also how I got
involved in uh spending quite a lot of
time on the Japanese markets, uh which I
found, you know, incredibly interesting
and really got to understand the
Japanese culture and and the way uh the
way the country operated. And uh
>> is that what led you to Namura or did
did Numeura come first and then the
Japanese exposure
>> that kind of led Yeah, it did. So
getting involved in Japan kind of led me
to to doing uh to doing convertible
bonds originally at ING and then with a
group of us at Namura and uh and uh
that's where I spent a lot more time on
the Japanese markets. And I think it's
all part of how you
you I think back to to those days, you
know, Japan was very different to what
it is kind of now. The market definitely
the market at the time was about 9 the
NIK was about 9,000 9 or 10,000 given
where
>> down from 39,000
>> from 39,000. Now we're back at 46,000.
So there was like a proper Vshape of
that market,
>> right? Only took three and a half
decades.
>> Only took three and a half decades and
and I managed to do the middle bit which
was not necessarily the most exciting
bit. I got to be honest. Um but I think
you know again it was a what was
interesting about it is you learn about
kind of an an economy and therefore a
stock market that is in such a different
place as it was then to you know looking
at the US market or the European markets
at the time.
>> So that raises a really interesting
question. How do you think How do you
think about the 1990s, even the 2000s?
You were at Numeura till 2011. Um, how
do you think about those decades versus
today? It that world doesn't seem like
it's that long ago, but it really feels
like it was so different.
>> It feels incredibly different. Uh, I
think for Japan, it's completely
different. You know, if you go back to,
>> as you say, the late 90s, early 2000s,
uh, you know, the banking crisis that
was part of the bubble
>> and the collapse had still not been
solved.
>> Uh, and it was only really in the early
early to mid 2000s that they finally
kind of got their arms around the
banking system. And
>> one thing you read about history and
unless you can get the banking system
operating properly and lending, um, you
really struggle to get an economy going.
The second thing that's really
interesting I think is so different is
back then you would every six months
every year there would be a
government-ledd fiscal impulse right and
you know they used to call it the
building the roads to nowhere right you
know paving the entire country just got
to kind of spend and spend and spend um
and the reaction of the market to that
was this is going to have no impact
>> the reaction now to fiscal spending is
actually this is you know great this is
kind of part of the economy the the
country kind of being back on its feet.
You're now talking about inflation being
potentially an issue in Japan whereas
there it was all about deflation. So
it's quite amazing how it has turned
around. Uh and you're seeing that in the
bond market and just the yields. One of
the things I'm kind of fascinated about
um following the Japan Japan bubble
popping in ' 89 and how long it took to
recover from that is the concept and I'm
apologies in advance for my
misprononunciation
of kiritsu which is the Japanese concept
of these vertically integrated companies
manufacturing retail banking like just
every sector if there's a banking
problem the entire economy seems uh run
into trouble because that whole vertical
sometimes it's Mitsubishi, sometimes
it's whatever each of these entities are
giant and if the bank has a problem,
wow, you're really doing some damage.
>> Yeah, because I think if you look back
to the history and again this is this is
changing and and uh and different to the
way we'd think about kind of western
markets and companies, but Japan
historically
uh it was a bank lending market. you you
got financing through bank lending or
the stock market. Um, and so banks were
just so central to the way the economy
operated. And you see parallels to that
in Europe, a little bit less. Here in
the US, it's very different now. You
know, there's the there's the banking
sector, which is obviously very critical
to the way companies and financing, but
you have this huge kind of private
sector. You have private lending, direct
lending, things like that. Um, so again,
it's good. I think one of the things
I've learned over my career and had the
opportunity to work in different markets
is you start to see these the way these
economies operate is different and
therefore the the impact on the markets
and therefore investors is very very
different.
>> So you stay at Namura till 2011. How did
you what brought you from Namura to
Black Rockck? So I had an opportunity uh
you know having had a lot of great
experiences um in 2011 uh BlackRock was
probably 18 months uh into the
integration of the eyesh business or the
the indexing business and really focused
on how do we expand this business
particularly how do we expand this you
know this ETF business
>> and back in 2011 Europe European ETFs
were still a very nent industry
uh you know now it's like a$2.5 trillion
dollar industry European eye shares is
over a trillion dollars um back then it
was very much still the very early days
and you could see what was what was
happening in the states and so when I
was speaking to BlackRock uh you could
see this really interesting opportunity
to to kind of take all of what I'd done
before in terms of the markets kind of
background and the breadth of experience
and then apply it to this thing that was
still pretty new And the the kind of
mission was how do you educate people
about what an ETF is? How do you help
people start to think about how to use
an ETF in a portfolio? And by the way,
also what are the ETFs that don't exist
yet that could exist? And again, you
always have to,
>> it's quite hard. You always have to
cast, you know, Barry, you always have
to cast your mind back to what it was
then versus your perspective of where
you are today. it was still fairly, you
know, plain vanilla in terms of what
>> go back to the 1990s. I pretty sure the
Q's were around then and SPY might have
been around.
>> This is before really Eyesshares was
still part of Barclays.
>> Um, but no one really thought that ETFs
were a giant market waiting to take
place or I should say very few people
thought that. The ones who did ended up
uh being at the head of a giant wave. Um
uh what made you realize 15 years ago
that hey this eyesshares thing is going
to be big one day?
>> Honestly it was talking to the people in
Eyesshares.
>> Uh it was having kind of been introduced
to them and having been approached to to
go and talk to them. Uh it was I learned
a lot from just sitting down and and
understanding this. I'd sat in banks. We
traded ETFs. They were to be honest a
very very small component of what we of
what we did. It was only really when I
spoke to the people at Eyesshares now
Black Rockck and understood the history
of how Eyesshares had grown and where it
was then and the that sense of mission
that sense of kind of the purpose of
giving more access to investing to to
people, you know, um and creating more
transparency
that they had lived as they grown the US
business and they were growing the
European business and that kind of just
captured you. uh and I think um frankly
in the last 15 years I've seen that uh
and been fortunately been part of kind
of driving that but it was very clear
that there was a big opportunity to do
something different in an industry an
asset management industry that hadn't
really been shaken up and I think one
thing that ETFs have done and iShares
has led this is really shaken up the
industry uh on behalf of end investors
>> in a couple of ways at at the very least
they're very low cost and it's raised
questions
about are do most not all but do most
active managers actually justify their
fees relative to their performance? And
then second
helping to move a lot of mom and pop
investors at least having a core uh as
passive indexing as opposed to uh an
allocation that's nothing but active
managers. I mean uh has been the biggest
driver of that. when you started at
Black Rockck, what was what was the
first job?
>> So, I started in the eyesh business and
I actually set up an investment strategy
team.
>> Um, and what we did was go out uh and
talk to clients about what was going on
in markets. You know, we were part of
BlackRock. Now, I was part of BlackRock.
And so there's you know huge pedigree of
investing and you how do you take that
externally to to our clients and educate
them about how ETFs could be used to
implement these ideas build portfolios.
Um I have to say in the early days a lot
of it was just educating people on what
what is an ETF like how does it actually
work?
>> How what is a creation? What is a
redemption?
>> Um and what do I need to understand and
know? Secondly, how do I then think
about putting them in a in a portfolio?
Um, and what's interesting, I remember a
couple of years in, probably this
probably uh 18 minutes months into my
time at BlackRock, uh, we did a big
study on how do you blend active and
indexing. Uh, and we're very allergic to
the word passive like because you know
we used to go out and say to people
which we still do you know every
decision you make is active, right? If
you
>> market cap weighted I mean it could have
decision been equal cap
>> totally you know investing in US
equities as a decision it's an active
decision uh then deciding to use an ETF
is an active decision so we would you
know we would talk to clients about what
does it mean to use an ETF how does it
fit with uh with active management which
again go back to I think it's pretty
well accepted now I think black
rockckers and the ETF industry has
played a big big role in this but the
concept of blending indexing and active
managers and alpha in on portfolios.
That's that's kind of very accepted.
People kind of get that. It's pretty
standard. But it wasn't back then 10 14
years ago
>> and in some respects it was slightly
religious in terms of indexing or like
you're either passive or you're active.
>> I recall the phrase that was used in the
2000s, core and satellite.
>> Core and satellite.
>> And and you don't hear that all that
much anymore. Now it's um you have a
passive core and you're you're
decorating it with active choices around
it.
>> Yeah. It's kind of how do you get the
best out of uh out of everything. How
how do you say you know what actually
here's an area where I think that we can
deliver alpha which is really what
you're when you say active what you're
really saying is like alpha you know
something something beyond the index.
>> And I come back to a point you made
earlier Barry about how the industry
shifted. I think what ETFs did is they
shone a light on what is what is
performance right uh and you know if you
can get the index through an ETF it's
very efficient uh then as an active
manager you've got to deliver something
more and many many active managers at
Black Rockck do deliver more but I think
that that element of the more became a
very important component of the industry
and component of how for many investors
they could then blend these these
different tools together to create
better portfolios. Uh, and I think
that's the journey to me in the last
kind of 12, you know, 12, 14 years has
been so exciting.
>> You said when you began you went out and
spoke to a variety of Black Rockck
clients. Uh, were these momand pop
investors? Were these institutional
clients? Were they brokers and raas that
are investing in ETFs on behalf of their
clients? Who were the folks that you
first reached out to?
>> It was pretty broad actually. It it
tended to be wealth managers. um and it
tended to be institutional investors
which would be you know uh primarily
pension funds um but what's interesting
is how that has
how that's expanded over the last again
the last kind of decade you know if I
look at uh if I look at the breadth of
users now
is anything from central banks through
to you know end retail investors uh in
401k plans or the equivalent in Europe
um and I think that's been one of the
secrets to the to to why ETFs have grown
so quickly is that they actually are
very much uh a product or a tool for
anybody and everybody. Um so it started
very much with I would say kind of
wealth managers and pension funds but it
grew out and out and out and frankly in
Europe we learned a lot from the way the
US industry had uh had grown. We talk
all the time about how the European ETF
industry is probably about 10 years
behind the US and so there's a bit of a
road map there and you know I think
we're seeing that happen in real time.
>> When I when I look over at Europe and
and especially the UK it seems like
index adoption has been very slow.
People haven't quite bought into the
concept of hey before you go after alpha
at least start with beta. that that
hasn't really found a lot of traction
there yet or are you seeing that start
to change in Europe?
>> We've seen that change. Um it's
definitely behind the US. Uh but it is
definitely happening and I think the
same forces and drivers uh that we've
seen in the US are very much applicable
to Europe and ultimately will be to Asia
as well which I think will go on that
kind of same journey. So I think it's
just more of a matter of time or timing
uh as to where we are now versus uh
versus versus the US and there are
different country dynamics that
everywhere in the world play into why
different parts of the industry you know
move quicker or slower. Uh but I think
the direction is definitely the same.
>> Different regulatory regimes, different
tax treatment
>> technology.
Is the technology really all that
different? You would think that adoption
maybe some countries on a lag but not 10
years.
>> Yeah, I think it's just uh so I I think
the last 10 years in the US if we are
today in somewhere like Europe in the
ETF industry where the US was 10 years
ago I think the next 10 years in Europe
will be faster than the last 10 years in
the US. Makes
>> sense. Yeah. Because I think that partly
because there is a there is a road map
that the US has created. It's different
because of regulation, all the things
that you that you mentioned. Um, but I
think that everything is happening so
much faster now. Uh, and and you're
seeing that in ETFs, you're seeing that
in other parts of the industry as well.
>> So, let's talk a little bit uh about
what you've been doing at Black Rockck
for almost the past 15 years. You begin
in 2011. The growth must have been
explosive. What was that like watching
uh this rocket ship take off?
>> It's been fantastic. It's been an
amazing experience. Uh you know the firm
has grown so quickly in the last 1015
years and not just grown in terms of
assets which is obviously one way to
measure growth but also just the breadth
of what Black Rockck does for our
clients and uh the breadth of the number
of clients that we talk to. Uh what's I
think so for for someone like me, what
what's so been so great is the ability
to be involved in lots of different
parts of the firm. uh and you know
whether that was again growing the
European eyesshares business, whether
that was running fixed income eyesshares
which was a fantastic uh opportunity and
time in uh or moment in time I should
say in terms of really not just growing
fixed income ETFs but changing the bond
market and the impact we've had there uh
to now where again the breadth of the
company with private markets and things
like that. So uh it has been a a great
journey to be on personally but also to
see it from the inside.
>> Can you explain what a chief product
officer does at a large asset manager?
It's sort of an unusual title in the
world of investing.
>> Yeah. So there are a number of things
that that I look at and my my team look
at. One is how do we continue to make
sure that our product range is
at the forefront of innovation in terms
of where the industry is going? How do
we make sure that what our clients are
looking for, we're delivering uh in
whatever format they're looking at? And
I think one of the biggest shifts that
we've seen in the industry, we talked
before about kind of how you blend
active and indexing kind of together,
how that's become more commonplace and
kind of more more accepted. I think the
other thing that is happening is that
the way all of our clients are you know
consuming investments or accessing
markets is also shifting. So this
concept that um you know pretty much for
the whole time that we were growing the
eyesshares business when we talked about
growing ETFs we were really talking
about we were also talking about growing
indexing that was very synonymous right
um when you talk about growing ETFs now
you're not just talking about growing
indexing you're talking about lots of
different things active ETFs digital
assets um and so I think this concept of
how we ensure that as we look across all
of the investment capabilities we have
as a firm that we want to bring to our
clients clients that we're delivering
them in a way that works for our
clients. That requires us to think a
little bit differently to to the way
we've had to in the past and the way I
think the way the industry has. And so
that's why we've brought all this
together in uh into my role and my my
group. And that includes driving the
eyesshares business and and the growth
of ETFs, making ETFs more central to to
what we do in the firm, but also looking
across all of our liquid active
business, our private markets businesses
with our investment teams and those
business leads to to ensure that our
product range, you know, works for our
clients and then helping them helping
our clients actually get the best out of
what we have. Uh, I started investment
strategy. We spend a lot of time talking
to clients about what's going on in
markets, uh, how to build better
portfolios, how to get the best out of
the tools that they have that we need to
build, and then what's next,
>> what's what's the next trend or theme
that's that's on people's minds.
>> So, so I'm hearing two um approaches.
One is a top down, hey, what's going on
in the world? Uh, what's out there
that's interesting that perhaps we're
not addressing? And a bottoms up, what
are clients asking for? What do they
think they want? What do we think they
need?
>> Um what what's the key driver of of new
offerings? We could talk a little bit
about IBIT, which is um a unicorn,
>> the the uh Bitcoin ETF approaching a
hundred billion dollars in assets. I
think it could be the fastest ETF to
hundred billion dollars. Um I I don't
even know what's what's close. maybe uh
GLD, but that that was a long time ago.
Um h how do you think about coming up
with new products? How much of it is
driven by client demand and how much of
it is driven by just looking from the
top down and saying here's a hole that
we really should fill?
>> Uh it's it's a real mixture. It is, you
know, we'll have a uh a lot of ideas.
Um, we'll have a lot of ideas that are
driven by investment views we have as a
firm, uh, by our investment teams, um,
by working with other people in the
industry.
And we will combine that with what we're
hearing from clients and where clients
are, you know, we're engaging with
clients all the time around, you know,
their portfolios uh and seeing where are
their kind of gaps in a portfolio or
where are there um sometimes it's
sometimes there are um uh investment
opportunities but there isn't a way to
get to it.
>> Um again come back to what ETFs have
done like how do you give that access to
to something that was new. If you think
about IBIT, you know, Bitcoin obviously
had grown already to a pretty sizable
kind of industry.
>> I think when IBIT launched, uh, Bitcoin
was a little over a trillion dollars,
something like that.
>> Roughly that. Yeah. Yeah. And, um, and
so there was a sizable kind of industry
already out there. But for many clients
or many potential investors, um the
ease, the comfort, the knowledge,
understanding of of an ETF rapper was a
great way of allowing them to
buy into crypto, Bitcoin in this case,
um and make it uh you know, potentially
a bigger part of the portfolio. What's
interesting is the number of you know in
in that explosive growth that IBIT has
had the number of um
buyers investors of IBIT who are already
holders of Bitcoin in you know other
forms was quite notable
>> and so I think it kind of tests to this
idea of actually how do you access
different markets sometimes in quite
traditional ways and how do you bridge
between this kind of traditional world
and this decentralized world And you're
seeing the same thing with Ether as well
with our Ether fund.
>> So, you know, the the classic Bitcoin
issue is wait, I have to make sure that
this drive doesn't get damaged. I have
to keep in the safe. What's my password?
Hey, this is a lot of money and it's a
bigger pain in the neck to keep track of
than the rest of my assets. I can own
this in an ETF. Why do I ever want to
own Bitcoin directly? Seems to be what a
lot of people are saying. And that and
that's what we heard over and over again
um both again from people who had held
or hold Bitcoin in digital wallets
>> and felt that this was a kind of an
easier better way to hold it. Um
>> especially when you read the numbers 25%
of all coins ever mined, it might even
be 30% have been lost. Either the drives
were damaged or the passwords were lost,
>> which is there's some great stories out
there.
>> Crazy. the guy who went out and bought a
landfill cuz he's
>> because he was trying to find the uh
>> $200 million worth of Bitcoin on a drive
that was accidentally thrown away. I
mean,
>> so, you know, putting in an eye share
probably would have been a uh um an at
least an easier way of uh of uh of
owning a landfill.
>> It's [laughter]
kind of amazing, but it raises um a
question that I've been thinking about
for a while. alternatives and privates,
whether it's private equity, private
debt, private uh infrastructure and real
assets are probably the fastest growing
segment of the market. Are we ever going
to see something like that in an ETF
rapper, an illquid alt um in an ETF?
>> Possibly. Um look it's definitely
something that uh a lot of people are
looking at including ourselves but there
are a lot of ways to I think the biggest
story I think people jump towards the
kind of private markets and ETFs and the
real story is how do you open up access
appropriately for more people to access
private markets as part of the
portfolio. So if we think about a world
which we believe in which you're kind of
moving from call it 60/40 you know the
traditional portfolio to more of a 50
3020 where 20 is private markets
>> and that's applicable to somebody who
owns a defined benefit scheme. In fact,
they've got that already, probably more
through the the way the scheme is
managed. But actually if you then apply
that to say to other pension types like
a defined contribution scheme or a
wealth investor that kind of journey
towards incorporating more private
markets into a portfolio for all of the
diversification reasons that you know
we've talked about a lot
that how that happens is is the real
work
>> and that may end up requiring an ETF but
I think there are lots of other ways
that you know that can open up the door
to private markets being a bigger part
either either a completely new part or
or a bigger part of a portfolio for you
know an individual retiree or an
individual investor. Again comes back to
what we were saying earlier on about
rather than thinking about um different
product types an ETF or a mutual fund
being associated with one type of
strategy. It's actually saying
what are the strategies that we believe
would help
a client an investor have a better
portfolio for whatever their goals are
and then how do you best put that
together?
>> So it's less less about the product more
about the solution to the
>> to me it's about the portfolio. Yeah.
What's the solution exactly? What are
you trying to achieve? You know and if
it's a you know long-term retirement or
retirement income what whatever it is.
Um and then what does the portfolio need
to look like or should look like and how
does it evolve over time? and then how
do you do it right um and what are the
kind of mixture of tools that are most
most appropriate to to get you there
that's the shift in thinking that I
>> so let's dive into that a little bit you
know the advantage of stocks bonds
convertibles
>> um they all come with a QIP number it's
pretty standard in terms of the
custodianship where where it's held uh
what sort of public information is a
available the due diligence you can do
about it how to get liquid when you want
to get liquid all those stocks, bonds
and and put convertibles as sort of a
hybrid.
Everybody knows how to operate around
that. It seems like when we look at
privates, they're all oneoffs. The
custodianships are all a single thing.
Doing the due diligence is time
consuming and expensive. they're the
hope is they're they're not correlated
and you're giving up liquidity in
exchange for the ili liquidity premium.
Uh, can that ever be standardized enough
that as a wealth manager I could say,
um, hey Stephen, I want to move 10 20%
of these clients assets to a diversified
set of equity debt and real assets
>> and I want some liquidity.
Like is this a pipe dream? Oh, and I
don't want any K1s because they're a
disaster to deal with. Um,
like if that were something that was
turnkey and available, I would think
that every wealth manager in America
would rush in that direction. How long
might it be before privates
look something like um public markets or
at least the pain points are are reduced
to something tolerable.
>> I think we're on a we're on a journey.
Um and I think that that is about first
of all developing investment strategies
and therefore and being able to put them
in products that work for a wealth
manager. Secondly, there's a big you
know the operational lift right the the
technology development that is happening
and we're working we're working with a
number of um firms around how can we
make sure that for example model
portfolios can incorporate private
markets in a more efficient kind of
easier to use way. um it's going to be
different to public markets. It should
be different to public markets because I
think the role of a of a infrastructure
for example in a in a in a portfolio is
different to the role of owning stocks
or owning bonds. And I think that part
of you know
part of the way we've always thought
about the role of stocks and bonds has
been different as well. You know bonds
is a ballast to a portfolio stocks as a
growth driver for example. I think you
know when bonds actually generated uh
attractive yields
>> maybe that'll come back you know uh we
might need a bit of inflation but uh
yeah one day one day Barry will we be
back on the podcast to absolutely to
cover that off but I I think that
different role is very important but
there's a lot of development to that is
happening uh to be able to make that
more efficient than it has been
historically and uh I think that's I
think we will see a lot of change in the
next couple years You you mentioned
technology. Let let's dive a little
deeper into that. Black Rockck acquired
Prequin and acquired Ephront. Um and I'm
read about some integration into your
Aladdin platform. How significant are
those tools uh when it comes to offering
private market investments to the
public?
>> Incredibly important. I think that um
you know for anybody who is for a wealth
manager who is running a portfolio for a
for a client
the it's not just as you know it's not
just about buying the different products
or doing the asset allocation it's also
about the risk management of of what
does that portfolio look like um and
that's really what Aladdin is about and
as more and more investors whether that
is a retail investor or wealth wealth
investor or whether that's a big pension
fund
incorporate private markets into
portfolios and blend private and public
and and I think again if you go back
over that 10-15 year journey we started
with indexing on one side of the floor
and you know active on the other side
and we gradually brought those together
and that became commonplace to blend and
I think we're now in that world of
starting to blend public markets and
private markets which historically were
completely distinct and we're starting
to kind of blend blend those because
because the industries are crossing over
more companies are staying private for
longer etc etc. So as we bring those
together, the need to be able to, you
know, risk manage and understand those
portfolios in different scenarios is
incredibly important. That's what
Aladdin is about. With prequin, what is
so exciting is that I think over time
the private markets will become more
transparent. There will be more data uh
available and around and very similar to
what uh what Aladdin and Black Rockck
did with public markets will happen in
the private markets as well. And that I
think will help more and more investors
access private markets in the way and
understand what it is that that they
have. Partly of which is again
understanding the different liquidity
and and being comfortable that they're
different for a reason. And you're not
trying to create a one-sizefits-all.
You're trying to create a portfolio that
delivers the right the right outcomes.
Aladdin I think is going to be critical
for that.
>> So let's talk a little bit about product
development. just in the ETF space this
year. Over a thousand new ETFs have come
out. Um or at least we're on pace to do
that by the end of this year. Uh this
sort of hyperdevelopment of ETFs, it
everything we've talked about seems to
be very thoughtful and very measured
with a a really specific approach. Kind
of feels like the rest of the industry
is just throwing stuff up against the
wall to see what sticks. H how do you
look at this? Um, we can only focus on
what we do. So, uh,
>> but you have to be aware of what's
>> But you are aware of what's going on.
100%.
>> 3x inverse Bitcoin. Like, what? Why? Why
do I want that? Or why does anyone want
that?
>> Yeah, you'll have to ask them. Um,
>> I mean, I guess it's um they want to
give people an opportunity to make any
type of trade and every type of trade.
I'm assuming that's not your approach.
>> I think there is a lot out there of
throwing things out that sticks. uh our
approach is very much where do we
believe that
we can develop products, strategies,
exposures that are going to help create
better portfolios, right? Um and if you
look at the evolution of the ETF
industry and what's happened is it
started you know go back 30 30 plus kind
of years ago it started very much with
how do you give access to kind of broad
indices and then it was how do you in
equities then how do you give access to
um more granular exposure like sectors
or different countries then it was how
do you move into different asset classes
like fixed income for example and then
more recently it's been something like
kind of digital assets with with IBIT
and that's really been the journey of
eyes right and I think that's been
therefore the journey of the industry as
we've as we've led it
that I remains very much our view how we
think about continuing to expand the
iShares platform and that includes now
using the ETF technology we've built to
take things like active funds and wrap
them into an ETF because the ETF is a
more efficient way for many investors to
actually own those different strategies
But again, it h it starts with the
strategy. And I think that, you know,
for us, it's about how do you um what is
it that you're developing in terms of an
exposure or a strategy?
Why? How does it fit with the world that
we see today in terms or where we think
the world is going from a market
standpoint and a macro standpoint? How
does it fit in terms of kind of a
portfolio construction standpoint? Um
you're going to have waves of
innovation. Right now we're having a
huge wave of of of ETF launches and in
particular last two three years you know
the ETF is it's um it's gone from being
kind of very much on the side of the
industry to being very central. We're
excited about that. You know that's what
we were that's what we've built at Black
Rockck and Eyesshares. Um but it's also
meant that ETFs are very much kind of
being used more broadly and you know
that's going to be I think part of how
the industry evolves and then you know
kind of matures
>> especially on the active side where you
get all the benefits of um mutual
ownership without the capital gains
penalty that you get in mutual funds. So
it makes sense that a lot of active ETFs
uh would develop where they might have
been active mutual funds. Yeah.
>> What else do you see as
changing or in the midst of of
transforming? Is is it by asset class?
Is it by you mentioned geography or or
sector? What is really in flux these
days?
>> So I think that um you know when you
look at I'll give you a couple of good
examples. So um digital assets I think
is kind of fairly early days. IBIT is
incredibly fast growing. uh it was the
fastest to 20 to 30 to 40 to 50 and now
hopefully to 100 billion uh as an ETF
and we uh you know we have an Ethereum
ETF. I think there will be more product
development in something like that and
again for us that's about bridging this
kind of uh DeFi world with the
traditional kind of finance world.
That's one area. The second area is take
something like fixed income. Uh you know
we've been building out fixed income ETF
industry for 20 years. Um the industry
is now two and a halfish trillion uh
dollars. We think it's going to be six
trillion by kind of 2030. The growth is
huge.
Less than 2% of bonds in the world are
in an ETF.
>> Wow.
>> So it feels and having been I can tell
you having been on the journey and and
and been out there, you know, kind of
pounding the streets on the value of
fixed income ETFs uh over the years, it
feels like this has become really really
big. And it has. And yet when you think
it in the context of the 140 trillion
dollars of fixed income out there um you
know ETFs are still a pretty tiny part
of the the market in terms of how people
own bonds. It's it's relatively large
compared to what it was, but in absolute
terms,
>> but in absolute terms, I still, you
know, we're still uh to use in uh the
the sports terminology given it's the
World Series. Uh you know, the first
inning, maybe the second inning. Um and
then even if you look at e what's really
fascinating is you if you look at um uh
and we talked about active active ETFs
and again that's still very early stage
>> but on fixed income they actually seem
to do very like the broad the Bloomberg
a
>> includes everything good bad and
different it seems like it's relatively
easy to capture a little bit of fixed
income alpha
>> with a handful of screens you're taking
out the the lowest credit quality or or
you're taking out the riskiest credit
that you're not getting compensated for.
Why does fixed income active seem like
it's a better bet um or a higher
probability bet than active equity? Um I
think the historically fixed income and
go back to when I started was very much
a uh a world uh of limited transparency
uh and and kind of understanding frankly
I think the understanding for most
investors of fixed income relative to I
don't mean I don't mean investors who
are doing fixed income all all every day
but for for most uh uh retail investors
in particular I think people have a much
more natural affinity to stocks than
they do for bonds in terms of kind of
the understanding uh bonds feel
complicated at times it feels like an
it's a world we don't quite understand
whereas equities you kind of you know
you know Google or whatever it is and so
I think there's always been a a sense of
kind of um outsourcing those decisions
uh kind of more so the other thing is
that the the indicy the indexing market
in fixed income has been slower to
evolve so you mentioned the A and people
tend to when they think about fixed
income indexing they automatically go to
the A
>> the A is one index and it's a very
specific index uh in terms of what it
is. It doesn't have a huge amount of
credit in it for example. Um but there
are other indices with Bloomberg uh for
which we have products like universal
that actually are much more
representative of fixed income. So part
of it also is is you know what are you
benchmarking yourself against and I
think we went through that experience
with equities
>> and we are going to go through that or
we're going through that experience with
with fixed income. And the other thing
we're seeing with fixed income is that
we're developing and building the more
granular
strategies in fixed income. So we're
carving up the market in fixed income
the way we did in equities through ETFs.
So if you want to own zero to threeyear
government bonds, own ESG, if you want
to own long-term treasuries, own TLT, if
you want to own bits of the different
types of credit crossover, you can now
do that through ETFs. So you know, it is
an amazing tool. And what's fascinating
about fixed income ETFs is that some of
the fastest growing users are asset
managers. So fixed income managers using
ETFs as a way to be better at their job.
Uh and I think again that's that
blending of of of indexing. But even in
the equity world uh you know equity
indices are evolving. We we were saying
uh if you look back to 2000 you know the
top seven uh you know the whole kind of
S&P was worth the equivalent to what the
top seven stocks were worth you know six
months ago. And so you mentioned earlier
in the program equal weight S&P.
>> We're seeing a lot of demand right now
for things like equal weight or capped
indices. Um we launched a top 20 fund,
top t uh we did the same thing with
NASDAQ. You know even the S&P 500 owning
the top 20 stocks versus owning the 500
stocks is a very very very different
game. And so even something like large
cap US equities you which you would have
thought there was nothing else to
innovate in even that has been the area
where we've probably done more in the
last 6 months than than many other areas
because the dynamics of of the US equity
market have shifted so much in the last
couple of years and investors are
looking for different things. Since
since we've been talking about
technology and you mentioned the top
seven, I I I'm legally obligated to ask
a question about artificial intelligence
and AI. What is AI doing to your uh
business of developing new products? Uh
how are we thinking about either AI as
an asset class or actually deploying AI
to help build new products?
>> I think we're seeing AI in probably
three areas. I the the first one is
obviously AI as an investment theme
which is very well kind of publicized
etc. and we're seeing that through uh
things like data centers obviously
stocks credit uh etc. The second one is
AI in terms of investment strategy. Uh
for example, Black Rockck, we're very
fortunate to have uh a systematic group,
investment group that is has a 40-year
track record and history uh of
delivering really great performance. And
you they would argue they were doing AI
well before it was called AI. Uh when it
was called machine learning or whatever
it was called before
>> it's been around most people think it's
new thing, you know,
>> it's been around a while.
>> Watson uh played Jeopardy and I forgot
the one or was it Deep Blue played chess
>> and [clears throat] go?
>> Those were 30 years ago.
>> Yeah. So you know it's gone through its
iterations and uh and so you know and
they've got some fantastic uh examples
of the way they've used machine learning
stroke now AI to really understand uh
you know every single day they will uh
pass thousands of reports um earnings
calls etc transcripts for for for
sentiment uh and and you know and the
result the investment results of those
of those signals that they create are
are really quite quite fascinating and
and very lucrative in terms of
investment alpha. And so we're really
seeing a huge demand right now for uh
systematic investing. Um and this is
something that historically people were
nervous was because it was a black box.
They didn't understand it. And now
people are using things like chat, GPT,
etc. which is a black box, but they're
seeing the value they're getting. And so
what's interesting is there's a
psychological shift and a greater
acceptance of saying actually
>> systematic investing using AI that's
really interesting and exciting. And so
so I think the second thing is we're
seeing it through using AI to be better
investors. And then the third one is
product development. And so how can we
use the data that we are able to collect
um and effectively deploy big data and
the AI that that we've developed in
house that sits on that to identify what
are some of those themes that are coming
up, what are some of the things that
clients are talking about or being
picked up in the the news or or or
whatever it is. Um and be more kind of
systematic, I would say, in being able
to see what those those are. And also we
are able to use it to test and stress
test strategies that are new in
different market environments. So it's a
really again it's a really exciting time
um for for product development because
it's giving us new tools that we didn't
have before.
>> So so Black Rockck tends to come out
with these very wellthoughtout very
rational products. And the question that
that I've been thinking about when I
first started doing my homework for this
is what are some of the crazy ideas that
you looked at and said, "Yeah, no,
that's just a bridge too far." Like what
hasn't come out because it was just too
either not solving a problem or or just
too wild and and reckless.
>> Oh, there's a whole treasure trove of
Yeah, we could do another podcast, I'm
sure. Um but you know typically what's
interesting about it is um uh there are
two reasons why you might end up like
that. One is it's it's a crazy idea but
there's just really no demand for it. Um
and uh and it um
>> well that's an easy business decision.
>> Which is an easy business decision. The
second time often it's you're just too
early.
>> Uhhuh.
>> And uh you know
>> I mean there could have been an ETF for
ETH and Bitcoin 10 years ago if the SEC
would have allowed it. if they were
allowed. Yeah. Yeah. So, sometimes it's
the regulatory, you know, it could be it
could be that the industry the industry
in the broad sense of the word
regulators or what whatever aren't quite
ready. You're not you're not able to
actually build the thing that you've got
an idea for. It could be that the market
is not quite ready. Fixed income ETFs is
a good example. We looked at things 10
years ago um and decided that actually
that the fixed income market wasn't
ready. we weren't quite ready to be able
to do that in an ETF
a decade on. And by the way, we launched
a bunch of those as well. Um, knowing
that it would take a long time. We
didn't expect to launch it and it be a
it would take off straight away knowing
that it would take time for the for the
kind of market to get there, but we were
comfortable we could manage that fund.
And so often you end up in a situation
where you're kind of waiting for maybe
the liquidity of the market to be to be
broad enough that an ETF works. So you
know it's going to work in the future.
It's just a little bit early now. So
there are a couple of different reasons
why that may be the case.
>> So so that raises a question what's next
on the product roadmap. So we we've
talked about uh digital and and crypto.
We've talked about fixed income and
we've also talked about privates. What
are you seeing as the next 10 years?
It's really across the whole waterfront
of what you just said. I mean, obviously
with uh with HPS uh and GIP with our new
partners, um there's a lot of
opportunity we believe to develop in the
private credit and the infrastructure
space and also the crossover of of those
kind of areas. Um I think this crossover
of public and private markets and what
does that look like in in portfolios,
whether that's within a fund or in a in
a portfolio, uh I think is going to be a
big and very interesting theme. And uh
and the third area I think is you know
we're constantly obviously we're we're
always working with our our active
portfolio managers to to develop better
strategies and and new ideas they have
but we are always always looking back as
well because I think you can fall into
the trap of thinking you've done it and
I mentioned the example of you know US
large cap equities and indexing and what
why would you ever look at that as an
innovation area? Well, because the these
markets keep changing and I think the
world we're world we're in right now and
a good example of the last six months
the number of clients around the world
particularly outside the US who are
questioning their US dollar exposure is
pretty significant
>> and what does that mean for time look at
the move in gold suddenly that is you
know the the thing to
you know you see you have to I think you
have to be willing to question the
environment the macro the market
environment and say actually what does
that mean for um for things that we kind
of thought we'd done. Uh and I think
that creates a lot of opportunity for
our for our clients to to renovate
things.
>> So before I get to my favorite
questions, I have one last broad
question for you. What do you think
investors and clients are not thinking
about, talking about, overlooking, but
perhaps should be aware of? It could be
an asset, a geography, a data point, a
policy. what is below the radar that
really should be front and center.
>> Um I think there are things that are
kind of half on and half off the radar
like you know the impact of what's
happening in demographics uh and
immigration and changes like that and
what does that mean for for inflation um
uh for the different types of uh income
streams that people are going to need is
something that's it's kind of talked
about but always slightly in the
background. Uh I think that's going to
come more and more to the four we it
ties into the fiscal policy kind of
which is very much kind of talked about.
Um I think that's one thing. I think
secondly is we're still we're still
living through a lot of the postcoid
impact and you know we don't co's kind
of done and we would it feels like it
was many many years ago but there are a
lot of industries and luxury is a good
example which is still
>> being impacted by what happened then
both in terms of the lockdown and then
the immediate kind of boom that happened
afterwards. there are still a lot of
things that are still trying to work
their way through the through the system
as it were. Uh and that tends to be
something I think people have kind of
forgotten, but from an investing
standpoint uh is actually pretty
important.
>> I I completely agree with you. It's
funny, we were just having a
conversation the other day about housing
>> and someone asked why we have such a
shortfall of single family homes in the
United States. Not even talking about
affordability of homes, just sheer
number. And the answer was that's a
hangover from the financial crisis 15 16
years ago following that boom and bust.
A lot of builders shifted over pivoted
over to multif family houses and
apartment buildings not single f. So
it's 15 years ago and we're still still
suffering the effects of it. It's
amazing uh how how long a tail some of
these things happen. It takes a long
time.
>> I I don't have you all day. I know you
uh have a flight to catch uh tomorrow,
so I have to get you out of here at a
decent hour. Let let's run through some
of our favorite questions, starting with
tell us about your mentors who helped
shape your career.
>> Um so I've I think I've been very lucky.
I've in in each stage of my career, I've
always had, I think, somebody who has um
been whether a manager or a mentor um
but but really helped me think through
and frankly just supported me in my
career. Um I think two particularly jump
out. one is um uh the person who
actually took me to uh to ING Bearings
and uh um who I first worked with there
who sadly is no longer with us but uh
was just an incredible friend and in
quite a pivotal time in my career uh
really helped me think through what do I
want to do next and uh and kind of set
me on that next kind of journey. Uh and
then the other one I have to say uh a
shout out to someone who was very early
in my career who I worked with um who I
kind of looked up to in terms of their
success who became my wife. So uh that
became a kind of a good men. She
continues to mentor me in slightly, you
know, different more direct ways.
>> That that's a that's a nice uh couple of
mentors. Le let's talk about books. What
are some of your favorites? What are you
reading recently?
>> Uh big fan um of um people like Ian
Mchuan. Um
>> I know the name Martin Amos. They're
just great uh great authors.
>> G give us some titles. M Martin Martin
Amos and Ian McKinn
>> Mchuan. Yeah. There's a great book Ian
Mchuan um called Sweet Tooth which is
all about it's got a great twist which I
won't go into but it's a 1950s 1960s
kind of spies
>> uh in in uh in the UK. And there's a
book um by Martin Amos which is um uh
the first I can't remember the full
title. It's time something
>> but it's written backwards. I kind of
remember my wife reading something like
that from Martin Amos and I don't
remember the title.
>> It's f it's fascinating. He he writes it
backwards. So everything happens
backwards. So the day starts with the
character going to bed.
>> Mhm.
>> And it's the it's written in the as the
consciousness of the the man. And um so
it's brilliant. It's just uh
>> I I'll dig up the title.
>> Very cleverly written,
>> huh?
>> And a good story actually. not quite um
uh inception. Um
>> but it's in that guise of of trying to
think about how time works and
>> um
>> yeah, I won't spoil it for you. Read it.
But it's the kind of book where even the
most simple paragraph, you kind of
reread it because you're trying to get
your head around the fact that it's
being written backwards.
>> Huh. Let speaking of Inception, um what
what's keeping you entertained these
days? What are you streaming either
watching or listening to? So, we've been
on a bit of a marathon recently. We've
done Yellowstone 1883, 1923 and Land
Man.
>> That is all on my in my queue and I
haven't started. I saw the first
>> Yellowstone on a plane and I'm like, "Oh
my got to drag my wife into this one."
>> It's good. You need to commit.
>> Um, but it's well worth it. Um, very
very uh Yeah, very gripping. All very
different as well.
>> So, you're you're a Brit giving me an
American Western.
Let Let this New Yorker give you uh an
MI5 London recommendation. Have you seen
the film Black Bag?
>> I have.
>> You have?
>> I I saw it on a plane. I spent a lot of
time on planes. Okay.
>> I actually saw on a plane. It was very
good.
>> I very upside. Wholly unexpected.
>> Very good. I'd never heard of it.
>> Yeah.
>> And then
>> And I assume you watch Slow Horses.
>> I That's where I was about to go is um
so I I I had my wife watching through
the second season and she kind of tapped
out. I'm trying to bring her in for the
most recent season.
>> You've got to get in. We're very much
the we won't watch it until it's all
out.
>> We We've made that mistake not doing
that with certain things.
>> It's um incredibly
>> like what what is this watching one show
a week? What are we living in the '9s?
>> Like I'm a
>> It's like when an advert appears,
>> right? It really is. Um final two
questions. What sort of advice would you
give to a recent college grad interested
in a career in fill up fill in the
blanks investing, ETFs, financial
product developing, fixed income. What's
your advice for that person?
>> Go for it. I this I think that I really
think this industry is changing so
quickly. I think it's changing faster
than I've in my kind of career uh in
terms of what is happening which I think
creates a lot of opportunity for
somebody starting out. Uh my advice I
always give to all of our analysts who
are starting out and frankly I give it
to pretty much all of our team uh is you
got to keep learning. this is constantly
changing and uh and you've gota just
you've always got to be on that kind of
learning
>> curve and uh and that's how you get
better. It's also where the
opportunities come from a career
standpoint.
>> Makes a lot of sense. Our final
question, what do you know about the
world of investing, product development,
ETFs today would have been helpful back
in the 1990s when you were first getting
started? Well, if I'd known that Bitcoin
was going to be at 120,000, I probably
would have done something different.
>> Say that, you know, I can say [laughter]
that about everything,
>> right? Back up the truck on Amazon in
2002 or Apple in 98 or Microsoft from
the IPO.
>> I think one thing it does lend itself to
and it sounds a bit strange for somebody
who started out uh you know on a bond
trading floor doing bond maths is you
realize over time only when you look
back the power of compounding. I know
everyone writes about compounding and
you learn about it obviously but it's
only when you have been around for a
while and you look back at what
compounding actually means uh as a both
an investor you know you know managing
your own kind of future retirement uh
and wealth and then uh or as a or as
somebody who works with with clients
about managing portfolios what
compounding actually does imply and uh I
was thinking about that the other day
actually
>> it it's very counter counterintuitive.
There's nothing in the natural world
>> uh in your ordinary experience as a uh
mammal that would give you any insight
into just exactly how exponential it is.
>> Yes,
>> it's really fascinating. Well, well,
thank you, Stephen, for being so
generous with your time.
>> We have been speaking with Steven Cohen.
He is Black Rockck's chief product
officer and head of global solutions. If
you enjoy this conversation, check out
any of the 586
we've done over the prior dozen years.
You can find those at iTunes, Spotify,
Bloomberg, YouTube, wherever you find
your favorite podcast. Be sure and check
out my new book, How Not to Invest: The
Ideas, Numbers, and Behavior That
Destroys Wealth and How to Avoid Them at
your favorite bookstore. Now, I would be
remiss if I did not thank the crack team
that helps put these conversations
together each week. Alexis Noriega is my
video producer. Anna Luke is my podcast
produc producer. Sage Bowman is the head
of podcast at Bloomberg. Sean Russo is
my researcher. I'm Barry Rholz. This has
been Masters in Business on Bloomberg
Radio.